HistoTME
==============

# Predicting the tumor microenvironment molecular composition from histopathology images to characterize immunotherapy responses in non-small cell lung cancer patients

## Overview 
Implementation of HistoTME in our paper "Predicting tumor microenvironment composition and immunotherapy response in non-small cell lung cancer from digital histopathology images":
[Citation]

The code in the folder HistoTME_regression can be used to run attention-based multiple instance learning (ABMIL) to predict TME signatures derived from bulk transcriptomics. In order to run experiments on the histopathology datasets, please download the features extracted by the UNI foundation model for the TCGA and CPTAC H&E whole slide images (WSI).

The code in the folder HistoTME_downstream can be used to run downstream prediction of immune checkpoint inhibitor response in NSCLC patients. Prior to running these experiments, features must be extracted from the WSIs. _______ stuff on clustering downstream

## Installation and prerequisites
Tested with Python 3.9. Tested on both GPU (should I test on CPU?). Install requirements using:
```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
## How to use
### Data Preparation
#### TCGA and CPTAC data
The TCGA and CPTAC whole slide imaging data can be found online from [GDC](https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/), [TCIA](https://wiki.cancerimagingarchive.net/display/Public/CPTAC+Imaging+Proteomics) data portals. The downloaded whole slide images should be stored in a single directory as shown below:
```bash
├── WSI_Directory
│   ├── slide_1.svs
│   ├── slide_2.svs
│   ├── ...
...
...
│   ├── slide_N.svs

```
After downloading the WSI run the following WSI preprocessing script to tesselate each whole slide image into a collection of non-overlapping 512x512 pixel tiles scanned at 20x magnification and extract features using UNI[], a pre-trained foundation model:
```
cd data_preprocessing/
./run_UNI.sh
```
The extracted features will be saved in a h5py file with each entry corresponding to a tile along with its physical coordinates and the foundation model-generated feature embeddings.
```
dict{'coords': (x,y), 'features': <embeddings>}
```

To calculate expression of TME signatures from bulk transcriptomics data please see the [following github repository](https://github.com/BostonGene/MFP/blob/master/TME_Classification.ipynb). 

#### Format Preparation
The extracted features should be in h5py file format to be read. A csv containing both TCGA and CPTAC cohorts should then be made with the transcriptomic-derived TME signatures and a file path to the extracted features. See HistoTME_regression/sample_data.csv for an example. 

### Training
Training can be run for multi-task ABMIL or single-task ABMIL using:
```
cd HistoTME_regression/
./run_multitask.sh
./run_single_tasks.sh
```

### Prediction
Predictions can be run on the SUNY cohort using:
```
cd HistoTME_regression/
python predict_SUNY.py --task=multitask
python predict_SUNY.py --task=singletask
```
Predictions using multitask or singletask ABMIL can be run on the CPTAC or TCGA cohort using:
```
cd HistoTME_regression/
python predict_CPTAC_TCGA.py --task=multitask --cohort=CPTAC
python predict_CPTAC_TCGA.py --task=singletask --cohort=CPTAC
python predict_CPTAC_TCGA.py --task=multitask --cohort=TCGA
python predict_CPTAC_TCGA.py --task=singletask --cohort=TCGA
```

### Attention Interpretability
Heatmaps can be generated by using:
```
cd HistoTME_regression/
python get_heatmaps.py
```
These can then be visualized using:
```
cd HistoTME_regression/
python generate_attn_maps.py \
--svs_loc </path/to/svs/files> \
--attn_maps_loc </path/to/raw/attention/values> \
--patch_size <selected patch size, default = 512> \
--mag <selected magnification, default = 20> \
--out_dir </path/to/output/directory>

```

## Questions and Issues
If you find any bugs or have any questions about this code please contact Sushant or Alex.

## Citation
If you found our work useful in your research please consider citing our paper:

## Acknowledgments



Testing
